### 3.4.6. [animation.h](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/headers/rendering/animation.h)
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
This header file contains all the functions that are a part of the animation pipeline.
#### 3.4.6.1. initNewAnimation
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine

```cpp
animation initNewAnimation(animation anim, string fileName)
{
	char cahr;
	
	fstream fbe (fileName.c_str());
	
	fbe>>anim.frames>>anim.height>>anim.width;
	
	anim.currentFrame = 0;
	
	for (int g = 0; g < anim.frames; g++)
	{
		for (int i = 0; i < anim.height; i++)
		{
			for (int j = 0; j < anim.width; j++)
			{
				fbe>>cahr;
				
				if (cahr == 'i')
				{
					anim.frameArray[g][i][j] = ' ';
				}
				else
				{
					anim.frameArray[g][i][j] = cahr;
				}
			}
		}
	}

	fbe.close();

	return anim;
}
```

**Usage:** This function initializes a new animation from an appropriate .txt file

**Variables:**

* **anim:** This variable will hold all the relevant information about the animation.
* **fileName:** This string holds the path from the main .cpp file to the .txt that contains the information about the animation.

**How it's done & notes:** First the function opens the correct file, and then reads the frames, height and the width of the animation (these numbers are at the start of the .txt file). Then for each frame it loops through a height by width chunk of characters, replaces all 'i' characters with ' ' characters and reads them into the animation variable. At the end it returns this variable. To learn more about the animation pipeline click [here](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/documentation/online/2.2.%20How%20to%20use%20the%20editors%2C%20and%20other%20further%20details.md/#224-the-animation-pipeline). To learn more about the animation structure click [here](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/documentation/online/3.2.%20Structures.md/#327-animation).

#### 3.4.6.2. playAnimation
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine

```cpp
void playAnimation(char console[CONSOLEROWS][CONSOLECOLS], animation anim, int yRow, int xCol)
{
	if (anim.currentFrame < anim.frames)
	{
		for (int i = 0; i < anim.height; i++)
		{
			for (int j = 0; j < anim.width; j++)
			{;
				console[yRow + i][xCol + j] = anim.frameArray[anim.currentFrame][i][j];
			}
		}
	}
}
```

**Usage:** This function copies the animations current frame to the correct place in the newConsole array (which holds the information about the current to-be-rendered frame).

**Variables:**

- **console:** This array holds the current to-be-rendered frame of the console window.
- **anim:** This variable holds the information about the animation we want to play
- **yRow:** This variable determines which row will contain the first row of the animation frame.
- **xCol:** This variable determines which column will contain the first column of the animation frame

**How it's done & notes:** First the function checks if the current frame is smaller then the amount of frames in the animation. If it is then it copies the animation's current frame into the correct position into the console array. The cell in the console window with the coordinate of (yRow; xCol) will contain the upper left character of the animation frame. To learn more about the animation pipeline click [here](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/documentation/online/2.2.%20How%20to%20use%20the%20editors%2C%20and%20other%20further%20details.md/#224-the-animation-pipeline). This function can only be called inside a game loop since it only "renders" one frame per call (you'll need to call [the renderConsole function](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/documentation/online/3.4.4.%20render.h.md/#3443-renderconsole) too if you want to see the results of this function on screen), as of 2.0.2. you need to externally increment the currentFrame sub variable of the correct animation, this bug will hopefully be fixed by the 3.0.0. version. To learn more about the animation structure click [here](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/documentation/online/3.2.%20Structures.md/#327-animation).

