# 2. How to use the engine
## 2.1. How the engine works: a breakdown of [the main .cpp file](../../ShadowFunctionsEngine.cpp)
### 2.1.1. Initialization
#### 2.1.1.1. System variables
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
First things first. The system adds all variables, most of these are vital for the engine and should not be altered (unless you understand how these systems work, in that case go nuts!). All of these will be explained in bigger detail in [the next big segement of the documentation](3._Description_of_EVERYTHING_and_3.1._Defines.md/#3-detailed-description-of-everything), but here are some examples:
```cpp
bool isWPressed;
```
This variable is true on any frame on which the W button is pressed.
```cpp
koordinate playerPov;
```
[The koordinate structure](3.2._Structures.md/#326-koordinate) has two sub variables: one for the x and another for the y axis. This koordinate variable stores the coordinate from which the player "sees" things. In the program it is used to store the coordinate from which lines are cast that will determine whether something is in the shadows or not.

```cpp
bool isNotExit = true;
```
While this variable is true the game loop keeps being called every x milliseconds.

#### 2.1.1.2. Alterable variables
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
The next category of variables are ones that are hard coded, but can be freely altered to anyone's desire. Again I will provide some examples but every variable will be explained in detail in [the next segment of the documentation](3._Description_of_EVERYTHING_and_3.1._Defines.md/#3-detailed-description-of-everything):
```cpp
player.row = 31;
player.col = 45;
```
This is the starting position of the player. The row runs along the x axis and the col runs along the y axis. It should be noted that these are different from the coordinates that are mentioned above. These refer to a set cell's row and column on the map. Each cell's four points have different coordinates. The cell that is defined by row = a and col = b has the following four coordinates associated with it's points: (a; b), (a + 1; b), (a; b + 1) and (a + 1; b + 1). It should also be noted that the coordinate system is only dealing with positive coordinates, and it's flipped, meaning that the (0; 0) point is in the top left, and the (infinity; infinity) point would be in the bottom right. For further information check out [the correct subsection](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/#2232-further-ramblings-about-the-coordinate-system) of [the part concerned with the map editor](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/#223-the-map-editor).
```cpp
int sleepTime = 60;
```
This variable is the number of milliseconds that pass between every iteration of the game loop.

#### 2.1.1.3. Variables that hold information parsed from the editors
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
The last variables that need initialization are all arrays. The values for these variables are all stored in the text files that you can (and are meant to) edit. These variables will also be explored in a [later section of the docmentaton](3._Description_of_EVERYTHING_and_3.1._Defines.md/#3-detailed-description-of-everything). Some examples:
```cpp
fov right[FOVROWS][FOVCOLS];
```
This is a 2 dimensional array with information about the shape of the field of view when the player is facing the right side of the screen. Both [FOVROWS and FOVCOLS](3._Description_of_EVERYTHING_and_3.1._Defines.md/#312-fovrows-and-fovcols) are defined in the [system.h header](../../headers/system/system.h). [The description of the fov structure](3.2._Structures.md/#323-fov) will be discussed later down the line.
```cpp
map newWorld[WORLDROWS][WORLDCOLS];
```
This array contains information about the texture of the map, different parts that are blocking player movement and different parts that are blocking light thus producing shadows. Both [WORLDROWS and WORLDCOLS](3._Description_of_EVERYTHING_and_3.1._Defines.md/#313-worldrows-and-worldcols) are also defined in the [system.h header](../../headers/system/system.h). [The workings of the map structure](3.2._Structures.md/#322-map) will be discussed in a later part.

For more information about these arrays please refer to [the part concerned with the editors](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/22-how-to-use-the-editors-and-other-further-details).

### 2.1.2. The game loop
#### 2.1.2.1. The intro
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
After the [initialization](#211-initialization), the game loop is started with the intro:
```cpp
//   The loop first waits for the set amount of time before computing anything.
Sleep(sleepTime);
```
First things first we wait for the set amount of time before doing anything.
```cpp
//   First we check if the 'E' button was pressed.
isEPressed = ePressed();
			
if (isEPressed)
{
	//   If the 'E' button was pressed then we prime the game loop to exit the intro
	// part and enter the game part.
		
	//   For this we first set the correct bool to false (so the game loop starts).
	isIntro = false;
			
	//   Next we set the variable controlling the framerate to the correct value for
	// the gameplay.
	sleepTime = 30;
				
	//   After that we prime the console window for cleariing the screen.
	clearConsole(newConsole, oldConsole);
}
```
Next we check if the 'E' button was pressed and if it was we terminate the intro by setting the isIntro variable to false, which in the next loop allows us to enter into the game part of the game loop. We also set the sleepTime variable to 30, since in the intro we only play an animation and that is best experienced with 60 milliseconds of waiting between every frame, however the game is played better at 30. (Till 3.0.0. I plan to add a feature to the animation player that allows us to play the animation at half speed, so we don't need to manually set sleepTime to 30 when exiting the intro.) Lastly before exiting the intro the program makes it so that the next [renderConsole function](3.4.4._render.h.md/#3443-renderconsole) will clear the screen,  with the help of [the clearConsole function](3.4.4._render.h.md/#3444-clearconsole).
```cpp
else
{
	//   If the 'E' button wasn't pressed we continue playing the animation.
				
	//   For any type of rendering in the engine we need to save the last frame of the
	// console window.
	saveLastConsoleArray(oldConsole, newConsole);
		
	//   Next we update the current frame of the console window by "playing" the next
	// frame of the animation.
	playAnimation(newConsole, logo, 0, 0);
	if (logo.currentFrame < logo.frames)
	{
		logo.currentFrame++;
	}
}
```
If however the 'E' button wasn't pressed we play the intro animation. To do this we need to save the last frame of the console window into the oldConsole array, then we update newConsole with the help of [the playAnimation function](3.4.6._animation.h.md/#3462-playanimation), and incrementing the currentFrame property of said animation if the frame that was just drawn wasn't the last one of the animation. For more information about the animation structure click [here](3.2._Structures.md/#327-animation).
```cpp
//   Lastly we render the console window.
renderConsole(oldConsole, newConsole);
```
Lastly after we checked if the 'E' button was pressed or not we render the current frame onto the console window.
#### 2.1.2.2. Keeping the loop going, storing input and information from the last frame
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
After we pressed 'E' in the intro the game part of the game loop is started:
```cpp
//   The loop first waits for the set amount of time before computing anything.
Sleep(sleepTime);
```
Like in the intro we wait for the set amount of time before doing anything.
```cpp
//   First we set back all the bools that deal with the input to false.
isWPressed = false;
isAPressed = false;
isSPressed = false;
isDPressed = false;
isEPressed = false;
isEscPressed = false;

//   Next we get the input by using the correct functions of the engine.
isWPressed = wPressed();
isAPressed = aPressed();
isSPressed = sPressed();
isDPressed = dPressed();
isEPressed = ePressed();
isEscPressed = escPressed();

//   After that we check if the escape key was pressed. If it was we set the bool that
// is responsible for getting into the game loop false, thus terminating the loop in
// the next pass.
if (isEscPressed)
{
	isNotExit = false;
}

//   Lastly we cancel out any contradictory input (such as left AND right). 
cancelOut(isWPressed, isSPressed);
cancelOut(isAPressed, isDPressed);
```
Next it deals with incoming input. Setting back all the bools to false that store the input from the 6 different keys, then [getting the button information from the keyboard](3.4._Functions_and_3.4.1._input.h.md/#3411-___pressed) for each and acting accordingly. The escape key is set up to be the one that exits out of the game, so if its pressed the game loop terminates. If however the escape key is not pressed, we [cancel out any input that would be contradictody](3.4._Functions_and_3.4.1._input.h.md/#3412-cancelout), such as moving right and left at the same time.
```cpp
//   Firstly we save the last frame of the console window.
saveLastConsoleArray(oldConsole, newConsole);
		
//   Next we save the position of the player in the last frame.
lastPlayer.row = player.row;
lastPlayer.col = player.col;
```
With information from the last frame we can make the game run much faster and the graphics look much smoother, so we save the last position of our player character and the last frame of the screen with [the saveLastConsoleArray function](3.4.3._output.h.md/#3431-savelastconsolearray). In every loop the oldConsole array holds the last frame and we update the newConsole to be the current frame.
#### 2.1.2.3. Player and camera movement
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
```cpp
//   First we calculate where the player should be moved according to the input.
player = playerMovement(player, isWPressed, isSPressed, isAPressed, isDPressed);
//   Next we calculate if the player can be moved into said position.
player = keepInBounds(player, lastPlayer, newWorld);
//   Lastly we set the direction of the player according to input.
player = setDirections(player, isWPressed, isSPressed, isAPressed, isDPressed);
```
With all of our existing input and information from the last frame, we can finally start to move the player! [The first function](3.4.2._movement.h.md/#3421-playermovement) determines where the player should be moved according to the inputs. [The second function](3.4.2._movement.h.md/#3422-keepinbounds) determines if said movement is possible [The final function](3.4.2._movement.h.md/#3423-setdirections) sets up the direction in which the player is facing, this is also done with the input, if the D key is pressed the player will face right, if the W key is also pressed the player will face top AND right. Basically the player will face in whichever direction he is moving in every frame.
```cpp
whereToCamera = camMovement(whereToCamera, player);
camera = cameraPan(camera, whereToCamera);
camera = keepCamInBounds(camera);
```
We need the camera to follow our character, so next we are dealing with this problem. [The first function](3.4.2._movement.h.md/#3424-cammovement) detects where the camera should be, [next](3.4.2._movement.h.md/#3425-camerapan) we pan the camera in that direction (it should be noted that panning the camera is not done instantly and needs time to be in the desired position), [lastly](3.4.2._movement.h.md/#3426-keepcaminbounds) we make sure that the camera is not going out of bounds. For information about the camera click [here](3.3._Variables_in_the_main_.cpp_file.md/#336-camera).
#### 2.1.2.4. Producing the binary shading
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
```cpp
setCurrentFov(player, currentFov, right, left, up, down, rightUp, rightDown, leftUp, leftDown);
playerInFov = getPlayerPosInFov(player, playerInFov);
addFovInfoToMap(newWorld, player, playerInFov, currentFov);

playerPov = getPov(playerPov, player);
```
Next we start preparing for the shading of the correct places. In [the first function](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#3452-setcurrentfov) we apply the correct field of view. In [the next one](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#3453-getplayerposinfov) we find out where is the player situated in the selected field of view, this will act as an anchor point between the world and the FOV array. With the help of this anchor [the third function](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#3454-addfovinfotomap) can add the FOV to the map, after this we will know which cells of the map are currently in the field of view of the player. The last thing we will need before we can start the shading is the point from which the player "sees", or from where we can cast lines to the correct places on the map, so we get this with the help of [the last function](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#3455-getpov).
```cpp
shadowFunction(newWorld, camera.col, camera.row, playerPov, edges);
holePlugger(newWorld, camera.col, camera.row);
		
mapIsEdgeCalculation(newWorld, camera.row, camera.col);
	
calculateScreen(newWorld, newConsole, camera.row, camera.col);
```
These four functions are the main focus of this engine. [The first one](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#34514-shadowfunction) is responsible for casting lines from the player's point of view to different walls in the environment, and calculating which cells are shaded. [The second one](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#34515-holeplugger) corrects a flaw of the shading algorithm ([the shadowFunction function](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#34514-shadowfunction)), this flaw will be discussed in the correct sub-chapters that are dealing with these two functions, but it is basically due to the small resolution of the console window. [The third one](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#34517-mapisedgecalculation) makes everything a little bit prettier, it draws a line that is less shadow-y, in between the cells that are in the light and the ones that are in the dark. Whilst these first three functions are concerned with calculating which cells are in view, or which are at the edge of light and darkness, [the last function](3.4.4._render.h.md/#3445-calculatescreen) translates all this information into textures and hands it over to the newConsole array for rendering.
#### 2.1.2.5. Rendering
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
```cpp
if (newConsole[lastPlayer.row - camera.row][lastPlayer.col - camera.col] == playerTexture)
{
	newConsole[lastPlayer.row - camera.row][lastPlayer.col - camera.col] = ' ';
}
newConsole[player.row - camera.row][player.col - camera.col] = playerTexture;

for (int i = 0; i < CONSOLEROWS; i++)
{
	newConsole[i][39] = screenDivisionTexture;
}

renderConsole(oldConsole, newConsole);
```
Finally the last part of the game loop is replacing the player character from the last frame with a ' ' and then re placing the player character into the correct position in the world. Then the screenDivisionTexture is added to the correct column in the newConsole array. Lastly the current frame is rendered with the renderConsole function.

And thus the cycle continues, if there is anything that needs clearing up the exact workings of the engine will be detailed in [the third part of the documentation](3._Description_of_EVERYTHING_and_3.1._Defines.md/#3-detailed-description-of-everything), and some details which I omitted here will be covered in [the next half of the second part](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/22-how-to-use-the-editors-and-other-further-details).

