# 3. Detailed description of EVERYTHING
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
This segment of the documentation will have four main subsections:
* [Defines](#31-defines)
* [Structures](3.2._Structures.md/#32-structures)
* [Variables](3.3._Variables_in_the_main_.cpp_file.md/#33-variables-in-the-main-cpp-file)
* [Functions](3.4._Functions_and_3.4.1._input.h.md/#34-functions)

## 3.1. Defines
### 3.1.1. SCREENCOLS, MENUCOLS, CONSOLEROWS and CONSOLECOLS
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
```cpp
//   The width of the "screen" part of the console window.
#define SCREENCOLS 39

//   The width of the "screen" part of the console window.
#define MENUCOLS 41

//   The dimensions of the console window.
#define CONSOLEROWS 24
#define CONSOLECOLS 80
```
**Usage:** These define the dimensions of the console window, and furthermore the "length" of the "screen" and "menu" part of the console window.

**Notes:** The "screen" part of the console window is where the player in the world is displayed. The "menu" part of the console window is empty as of 2.0.2. but in further updates I plan to add a basic inventory/menu system in this part of the console.  If you change the dimensions of the FOVs it may be necessary to alter the SCREENROWS and MENUCOLS defines, the CONSOLEROWS and CONSOLECOLS defines however should not be altered since the console window is 24 by 80. For more information about why the console window is divided into two smaller parts click [here](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/#2212-the-whys-of-the-fov-editors-and-the-explanation-of-the-newscreen-and-newmenu-arrays).

### 3.1.2. FOVROWS and FOVCOLS
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
```cpp
//   The dimensions of the FOVs and FOV arrays.
#define FOVROWS 21
#define FOVCOLS 35
```
**Usage:** These define the dimensions of the [FOV editors](../../FOVs), and also [the arrays that hold the information parsed from those editors](3.3._Variables_in_the_main_.cpp_file.md/#3316-fov-arrays).

**Notes:** These defines can be altered if someone wishes, but I don't think that is necessary. However if you do alter these please be wary, you can accidentally set their values to numbers that could mess with the rendering of the "screen" part of the console window, or these values [could indirectly negatively affect the map of the world](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/#2231-how-to-use-the-map-editor).

### 3.1.3. WORLDROWS and WORLDCOLS
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
```cpp
//   The dimensions of the world map.
#define WORLDROWS 63
#define WORLDCOLS 231
```
**Usage:** These define the dimensions of the [map editor](../../maps/world.txt), and also the [newWorld array](3.3._Variables_in_the_main_.cpp_file.md/#3320-newworld) which holds the information parsed from said editor.

**Notes:** These values can be altered freely, just make sure they are equal to the dimensions of [the map editor file](../../maps/world.txt), if you want to parse the whole of that file. Also leave 19 cells on the top and bottom and 35 cells on each side of the map unalterable, the reason for this was explained in a note [here](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/#2231-how-to-use-the-map-editor). For the 3.0.0. update I plan to make this process more streamlined, so you don't need to hard code the dimensions of the world into the program itself.

### 3.1.4. SOLIDCOUNT and WALKABLECOUNT
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine
```cpp
//   The amount of characters in the solidcount.txt file.
#define SOLIDCOUNT 1
//   The amount of characters in the walkablecount.txt file.
#define WALKABLECOUNT 1
```
**Usage:** These defines are equal to the number of characters that will be parsed in their respective material editor.

**Notes:** These values should be changed if you want to add more "materials" (or characters) that have one or both of the possible attributes. These values should NEVER be any more than the number of characters their respective .txt files hold! For more information about these editors click [here](2.2._How_to_use_the_editors,_and_other_further_details.md/#222-how-to-use-the-material-editors).

### 3.1.5 INFINITECIMAL

###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine

```cpp
//   A small amount that helps correcting cases like x = 1/3 = 0.333333 then
// x * 3 = 0.999999 =/= 1. 
#define INFINITECIMAL 0.000001
```

**Usage:**  This define holds a small amount that is in some cases added or subtracted to or from equations that are used to calculate line intersections.

**Notes:**  The usage of this define will be explored in further detail in [the description of the isMoreThanHalfInShade function](3.4.5._shadowFunctions.h.md/#34510-ismorethanhalfinshade), but this define should never be altered because it will wreck the shading system completely.

### 3.1.6. MAXAMOUNTOFANIMATIONFRAMES

###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.2. version of the engine

```cpp
//   The maximum amount of frames that can be in an animation.
#define MAXAMOUNTOFANIMATIONFRAMES 500
```

**Usage:** This define contains the maximum amount of frames an animation can have. 

**Notes:** You should change this define if you want to have an animation that exceeds the length of `(sleepTime * MAXAMOUNTOFANIMATIONFRAMES) / 1000` seconds. Where sleepTime is the milliseconds that pass between drawing two frame, and 1000 is the amount of milliseconds a second has. To learn more about the animation pipeline click [here](3.2._Structures.md/#327-animation).