# 2. How to use the engine
## 2.1. How the engine works: a breakdown of [the main .cpp file](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/ShadowFunctionsEngine.cpp)
### 2.1.1. Initialization
#### 2.1.1.1. System variables
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.1. version of the engine
First things first. The system adds all variables, most of these are vital for the engine and should not be altered (unless you understand how these systems work, in that case go nuts!). All of these will be explained in bigger detail in [the next big segement of the documentation](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/documentation/3.-Description-of-EVERYTHING-3.1.-Defines-and-3.2.-Structures.md/#3-detailed-description-of-everything), but here are some examples:
```cpp
bool isWPressed;
```
This variable is true on any frame on which the W button is pressed.
```cpp
koordinate playerPov;
```
[The koordinate structure](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/documentation/3.-Description-of-EVERYTHING-3.1.-Defines-and-3.2.-Structures.md/#326-koordinate) has two sub variables: one for the x and another for the y axis. This koordinate variable stores the coordinate from which the player "sees" things. Algorythmically speaking it stores the coordinate from which lines are cast that will determine whether something is in the shadows or not.
```cpp
bool isNotExit = true;
```
While this variable is true the game loop keeps being called every x miliseconds.

#### 2.1.1.2. Alterable variables
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.0. version of the engine
The next category of variables are ones that are hardcoded, but can be freely altered to anyone's desire. Again I will provide some examples but every variable will be explained in detail in [the next segment of the documentation](#3-detailed-description-of-everything):
```cpp
player.row = 31;
player.col = 45;
```
This is the starting position of the player. The row runs along the x axis and the col runs along the y axis. It should be noted that these are different from the coordinates that are mentioned above. These refer to a set cell's row and column on the map. Each cell's four points have different coordinates. The cell that is defined by row = a and col = b has the following four coordinates associated with it's points: (a; b), (a + 1; b), (a; b + 1) and (a + 1; b + 1). It should also be noted that the coordinate system is only dealing with positive coordinates, and it's flipped, meaning that the (0; 0) point is in the top left, and the (infinity; infinity) point would be in the bottom right. For further information check out [the correct subsection](#2232-further-ramblings-about-the-coordinate-system) of [the part concerned with the map editor](#223-the-map-editor).
```cpp
int sleepTime = 60;
```
This variable is the number of miliseconds that pass between every iteration of the game loop.

#### 2.1.1.3. Variables that hold information parsed from the editors
###### This section was last checked in the 2.0.0. version of the engine
The last variables that need initialization are all arrays. The values for these variables are all stored in the text files that you can (and are meant to) edit. These variables will also be explored in a [later section of the docmentaton](#3-detailed-description-of-everything). Some examples:
```cpp
fov right[FOVROWS][FOVCOLS];
```
This is a 2 dimensional array with information about the shape of the field of view when the player is facing the right side of the screen. Both [FOVROWS and FOVCOLS](#312-fovrows-and-fovcols) are defined in the [system.h header](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/headers/system/system.h). [The description of the fov structure](#323-fov) will be discussed later down the line.
```cpp
map newWorld[WORLDROWS][WORLDCOLS];
```
This array contains information about the texture of the map, different parts that are blocking player movement and different parts that are blocking light thus producing shadows. Both [WORLDROWS and WORLDCOLS](#313-worldrows-and-worldcols) are defined in the [system.h header](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/headers/system/system.h). [The workings of the map structure](#322-map) will be discussed in a later part.

For more information about these arrays please refer to [the part concerned with the editors](#22-how-to-use-the-editors-and-other-further-details).

### 2.1.2. The game loop
#### 2.1.2.1. Keeping the loop going, storing input and information from the last frame
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
After the [initialization](#211-initialization), the game loop is started:
```cpp
Sleep(sleepTime);
```
The first thing it does is to wait for the set amount of time before doing anything.
```cpp
isWPressed = false;
isAPressed = false;
isSPressed = false;
isDPressed = false;
isEscPressed = false;

isWPressed = wPressed();
isAPressed = aPressed();
isSPressed = sPressed();
isDPressed = dPressed();
isEscPressed = escPressed();

if (isEscPressed)
{
	isNotExit = false;
}

cancelOut(isWPressed, isSPressed);
cancelOut(isAPressed, isDPressed);
```
Next it deals with incoming input. Setting back all the bools to false that store the input from the 5 different keys, then [getting the button information from the keyboard](#3411-___pressed) for each and acting accordingly. The escape key is set up to be the one that exits out of the game, so if its pressed the gameloop terminates. If however the escape key is not pressed, we [cancel out any input that would be contradictody](#3412-cancelout), such as moving right and left at the same time.
```cpp
saveLastScreenArray(oldScreen, newScreen);
saveLastMenuArray(oldMenu, newMenu);
		
lastPlayer.row = player.row;
lastPlayer.col = player.col;
```
With information from the last frame we can make the game run much faster and the graphics look much smoother, so we save the last position of our player character and the last frame of the screen with two functions: [saveLastScreenArray](#3431-savelastscreenarray) and [saveLastMenuArray](#3432-savelastmenuarray) (the screen of the console is segmented into two seperate arrays [newScreen](#3314-newscreen) and [newMenu](#3316-newmenu), with their respective counterparts from the frame before being [oldScreen](#3313-oldscreen) and [oldMenu](#3315-oldmenu), the explanation for this can be found [here](#2212-the-whys-of-the-fov-editors-and-the-explanation-of-the-newscreen-and-newmenu-arrays)).
#### 2.1.2.2. Player and camera movement
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
player = playerMovement(player, isWPressed, isSPressed, isAPressed, isDPressed);
player = keepInBounds(player, lastPlayer, newWorld);
player = setDirections(player, isWPressed, isSPressed, isAPressed, isDPressed);
```
With all of our existing input and information from the last frame, we can finally start to move the player! [The first function](#3421-playermovement) determines where the player should be moved according to the inputs. [The second function](#3422-keepinbounds) determines if said movement is possible [The final function](#3423-setdirections) sets up the direction in which the player is facing, this is also done with the input, if the D key is pressed the player will face right, if the W key is also pressed the player will face top AND right. Basically the player will face in whichever direction the inputs dictate in every frame.
```cpp
whereToCamera = camMovement(whereToCamera, player);
camera = cameraPan(camera, whereToCamera);
camera = keepCamInBounds(camera);
```
We need the camera to follow our character, so next we are dealing with this problem. [The first function](#3424-cammovement) detects where the camera should be, [next](#3425-camerapan) we pan the camera in that direction (it should be noted that panning the camera is not done instantly and needs time to be in the desired position), [lastly](#3426-keepcaminbounds) we make sure that the camera is not going out of bounds. For information about the camera click [here](#336-camera).
#### 2.1.2.3. Producing the binary shading
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
setCurrentFov(player, currentFov, right, left, up, down, rightUp, rightDown, leftUp, leftDown);
playerInFov = getPlayerPosInFov(player, playerInFov);
addFovInfoToMap(newWorld, player, playerInFov, currentFov);

playerPov = getPov(playerPov, player);
```
Next we start preparing for the shading of the correct places. In [the first function](#3452-setcurrentfov) we apply the correct field of view. In [the next one](#3453-getplayerposinfov) we find out where is the player situated in the selected field of view, this will act as an anchor point between the world and the FOV array. With the help of this anchor [the third function](#3454-addfovinfotomap) can add the FOV to the map, after this we will know which cells of the map are currently in the field of view of the player. The last thing we will need before we can start the shading is the point from which the player "sees", or from where we can cast lines to the correct places on the map, so we get this with the help of [the last function](#3455-getpov).
```cpp
shadowFunction(newWorld, camera.col, camera.row, playerPov, edges);
		
mapIsEdgeCalculation(newWorld, camera.row, camera.col);
	
calculateScreen(newWorld, newScreen, camera.row, camera.col);
```
These three functions are the main focus of this engine. [The first one](#34512-shadowfunction) is responsible for casting lines from the player's point of view to different walls in the enviroment, and calculating which cells are fully encapsualted in shadow. [The second one](#34514-mapisedgecalculation) makes everything a little bit prettier, it draws a line that is less shadow-y, inbetween the cells that are in the light and the ones that are in the dark. Whilst these first two functions are concerned with calculating which cells are in view, or which are at the edge of light and darkness, [the third function](#3445-calculatescreen) translates all this information into textures and hands it over to the newScreen array for rendering.
#### 2.1.2.4. Rendering
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
if (newScreen[lastPlayer.row - camera.row][lastPlayer.col - camera.col] == playerTexture)
{		
	newScreen[lastPlayer.row - camera.row][lastPlayer.col - camera.col] = ' ';
}
newScreen[player.row - camera.row][player.col - camera.col] = playerTexture;

for (int i = 0; i < SCREENROWS; i++)
{
	newMenu[i][0] = screenDivisionTexture;
}

renderScreen(oldScreen, newScreen);

renderMenu(oldMenu, newMenu);
```
Finally the last part of the game loop is repalcing the player character from the last frame with a ' ' and then re placing the player character into the correct position in the world. Then the [newMenu](#3316-newmenu) is filled up with the line that divides it from the [newScreen](#3314-newscreen) (more about these arrays in [the part which is discussing the FOV editors](#221-the-fov-editors)). Lastly both the [newScreen](#3314-newscreen) and [newMenu](#3316-newmenu) are rendered in the console window with the [renderScreen](#3443-renderscreen) and [renderMenu](#3444-rendermenu) functions.

And thus the cycle continues, if there is anything that needs clearing up the exact workings of the engine will be detailed in [the third part of the documentation](#3-detailed-description-of-everything), and some details which I omited here will be covered in [the next half of the second part](#22-how-to-use-the-editors-and-other-further-details).

## 2.2. How to use the editors, and other further details
### 2.2.1. The FOV editors
#### 2.2.1.1. How to use the FOV editors
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
The FOV "editors" are the textfiles located in [the FOVs folder](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/tree/master/FOVs). There is a file for each of the eight directions the player can look. For exaple, this is the [rightUp.txt](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/FOVs/rightUp.txt):
```
0000000000000000____________0000000  
00000000000_____________________000  
000000___________________________00  
0000______________________________0  
0__________________________________  
___________________________________  
___________________________________  
___________________________________  
0__________________________________  
00________________________________0  
000_______________________________0  
0000_____________________________00  
00000___________________________000  
000000_________________________0000  
0000000@______________________00000  
00000000_____________________000000  
000000000___________________0000000  
0000000000_________________00000000  
00000000000_______________000000000  
0000000000000___________00000000000  
000000000000000_______0000000000000  
```
The description of each character:
* The '@' character represents the player, there should be exactly 1 of these characters per FOV file because it acts as the anchor point between the .txt and the map on which the information about the field of view is pasted onto (the function that does this can be found [here](#3454-addfovinfotomap)). (As of version 1.0.0. the position of this character does not get automatically parsed by the engine, so if you want to change it in this file you'll need to hardcode that change into [the correct function](#3453-getplayerposinfov) as well. Fixing this issue is a planned goal for version 2.0.0.)
* The '_' characters represent cells that are in the player's field of view.
* The '0' characters represent cells that are not in the player's field of view.

You can freely redraw any part of these .txt files, with the '@', '_' and '0' characters. The engine will parse the information and produce the new fields of view in the game. (When dealing with the '@' character please refer back to the description of it to make sure everything will work properly)

#### 2.2.1.2. The whys of the FOV editors and the explanation of the newScreen and newMenu arrays
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
All of these .txt files have a set height (21) and width (35). I wanted to make FOVs that are symmetrical, because it doesn't make sense if for example the player has a bigger field of view when he is looking right than when he is looking up. Since the console window is 24 cells by 80 cells the maximum width of the field of view can only be roughly equal to the height of 24 cells. That comes to about 39 cells in width. I also wanted to make a margin around all of the field of views. The reasoning behind this decision was that I think it looks wierd if there is a cell that is in the field of view and also on the edge of the screen. Any such cell could mistakenly communicate that the field of view stretches beyond the screen which is (in my opinion) not something we want. As a result of all of this the field of view files shrunk to 21 by 35 (however upon further thinking for an easier time interpreting the editors I plan to expand their dimensions to 24 by 39 for the 2.0.0. version of the engine).

Since the dimensions of the field of view are this small there is plenty of space on the screen for other stuff to be displayed. Thus the console window was separated to the [newScreen](#3314-newscreen) and [newMenu array](#3316-newmenu)s. As of now the [newMenu array](#3316-newmenu) is not in use, I plan to add basic functions and/or editors that could produce a menu or an inventory system on that half of the console window. If you want to expand the dimensions of the FOV files you'll need to change the value of [FOVROWS and FOVCOLS](#312-fovrows-and-fovcols) which are defined in the [system.h header file](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/headers/system/system.h), but be prepared, if you change it to anything that is bigger than the dimensions of the [newScreen array](#3314-newscreen) (which is 24 by 39) you will run into complications. But before you do anything with any of these values or the files please read [the part about using the map editors](#2231-how-to-use-the-map-editor), there is a note reffering to possible problems that might surface.

### 2.2.2. How to use the material editors
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
The material "editors" are the .txt files located in [the materials folder](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/tree/master/materials). One of them ([walkable.txt](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/materials/walkable.txt)) contains characters that don't block player movement, and the other ([solid.txt](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/materials/solid.txt)) contains characters that block light, thus creating shadows. Both of them function exactly the same, so I am only going to discuss the workings of the one concerned with the characters that are blocking light. Characters in the editor should be seperated by an enter. When you are updating this file, make sure that the value of [SOLIDCOUNT](#314-solidcount-and-walkablecount) equals that of the characters in this file, otherwise the function that loads these characters would go over too few or too many of them.

### 2.2.3. The map editor
#### 2.2.3.1. How to use the map editor
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
The map "editor" is [the text file](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/maps/world.txt) located in [the maps folder](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/tree/master/maps). It is a huge 231 by 63 .txt file, as with the other editors if you want to alter its size you should alter the value of [WORLDROWS and WORLDROWS](#313-worldrows-and-worldcols) in [the system.h file](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/headers/system/system.h) as well. You might wonder why it's filled with 'i' characters, thats because I didn't figure out a way to read spaces, so any 'i' you see in any of the editors will be parsed by the engine as a ' ' character. You can write anything into [this .txt](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/maps/world.txt) (except for spaces I guess) and it will be visible in the map of the game. Any character that you write here and also into at least one of [the material editors](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/tree/master/materials) will have the properties associated with said editor.

**Note:** As of now it is recommended that you leave out 19 cells on the top and bottom and 35 cells at the sides of any map you create. Make sure the player can't pass into any of these left out cells (there is an example of how you can do this in [the default world.txt file](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/maps/world.txt)). The reason for this is that if the player would be in any of these cells, looking in the wrong direction, the engine would make calculations with variables in the [newWorld array](#3321-newworld) that simply do not exist, leading to all sorts of problems. If you [alter the dimensions of the FOV files](#2212-the-whys-of-the-fov-editors-and-the-explanation-of-the-newscreen-and-newmenu-arrays) this recommended 19 and 35 cells might be too little to avoid any such catastrophe (or they might be too much, which can be a problem if you want to make bigger walkable maps). Hopefully the 2.0.0. update will solve this issue and we can finally use the map editor in its intended way.

#### 2.2.3.2. Further ramblings about the coordinate system
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
I have explained the coordinate system once before, but just to be sure I will reiterate here. The coordinate system only deals with positive coordinates, and it is flipped, meaning that the (0; 0) cell is on the top left, and the (231; 63) cell is at the botom right of (in this case) [the editor](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/maps/world.txt) (this is because the windows API uses a coordinate system like this, and I use this API for certain tasks that involve the manipulation of the console window). Columns run along the x axis and rows run along the y axis, the conversion between these names is often needed to understand the code of this engine.

**Cells and points should NOT be confused!** Cell's coordinates refer to the coordinate of a character in for example [the map editor](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/maps/world.txt), or in the [newWorld array](#3321-newworld), and they are often used with col and row variables instead of the x and the y of a normal coordinate system. Points on the other hand refer to actual coordinates. These point coordinates are used in casting the lines from the player to the differnet obstacles in the enviroment, to produce shadows. 
```
Coordinate of the upper left point:                                 Coordinate of the upper right point:
                             (a; b)  _____________________________  (a + 1; b)
                                     |                           |
                                     |                           |
                                     |                           |
                                     |                           |
                                     |  Coordinate of the cell:  |
                                     |           (a; b)          |
                                     |                           |
                                     |                           |
                                     |                           |
Coordinate of the bottom left point: |___________________________|  Coordinate of the bottom right point:
                          (a; b + 1)                                (a + 1; b + 1)
```
Each cell has four point coordinates associated with it. If the cell's coordinates are (a; b) then the point on the upper left is (a; b) the point on the upper right is (a + 1; b) the point on the bottom left is (a; b + 1) and the point on the bottom right is (a + 1; b + 1), as the figure above represents.
