### 3.4.2. [movement.h](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/headers/output/movement.h)
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
This header file contains functions that deal with moving the player and the camera according to what the inputs and the game world dictates.
#### 3.4.2.1. playerMovement
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
mob playerMovement(mob playr, bool w, bool s, bool a, bool d)
{
	if (s)
	{
		playr.row++;
	}
	
	if (w)
	{
		playr.row--;
	}
	
	if (d)
	{
		playr.col++;
	}
	
	if (a)
	{
		playr.col--;
	}
	
	return playr;
}
```
**Usage:** This function calculates where the player would be according to this frame's inputs.

**Variables:**
* **playr:** This variable holds the position of the player character.
* **w:** This is true when the w key is pressed down, if it is the player gets moved up. 
* **s:** This is true when the s key is pressed down, if it is the player gets moved down.
* **a:** This is true when the a key is pressed down, if it is the player gets moved to the left.
* **d:** This is true when the d key is pressed down, if it is the player gets moved to the right.

**How it's done & notes:** The function checks for each of the four bools and increments the player's position if any is true. This function only calculates the possible position of the player. This position can be inside walls, the [keepInBounds](#3422-keepinbounds) function is the one responsible for clearing up those sort of messes.
#### 3.4.2.2. keepInBounds
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
mob keepInBounds(mob playr, mob lastPlayr, map world[WORLDROWS][WORLDCOLS])
{
	if (playr.row != lastPlayr.row && playr.col != lastPlayr.col)
	{
		if (world[playr.row][playr.col].walkable == false)
		{
			if (world[playr.row][lastPlayr.col].walkable == true && world[lastPlayr.row][playr.col].walkable == true)
			{
				playr.row = lastPlayr.row;
				playr.col = lastPlayr.col;
			}
			else
			{
				if (world[playr.row][lastPlayr.col].walkable == false && world[lastPlayr.row][playr.col].walkable == false)
				{
					playr.row = lastPlayr.row;
					playr.col = lastPlayr.col;
				}
				
				if (world[playr.row][lastPlayr.col].walkable && world[lastPlayr.row][playr.col].walkable == false)
				{
					playr.col = lastPlayr.col;
				}
				else
				{
					playr.row = lastPlayr.row;
				}
			}
		}
		else
		{
			if (world[playr.row][lastPlayr.col].walkable == false && world[lastPlayr.row][playr.col].walkable == false)
			{
				playr.row = lastPlayr.row;
				playr.col = lastPlayr.col;
			}
		}
	}
	else
	{
		if (world[playr.row][playr.col].walkable == false)
		{
			playr.row = lastPlayr.row;
			playr.col = lastPlayr.col;
		}	
	}
	
	return playr;
}
```
**Usage:** This function prevents the player from passing into unpassable objects.

**Variables:**
* **playr:** This variable holds the current caluclated possible position of the player (or in other words the cell the player wants to pass into accordint to the input).
* **lastPlayr:** This variable holds the player's position from the last frame.
* **world:** This array holds the map of the world with all of the attributes of each cell.

**How it's done & notes:** First we check if both of the coordinates of the player have changed. We do this because if it haven't, we have an easy time, we only need to set back the player into the last frame's position if the cell he passed into blocks player movement (this attribute is stored in the .walkable part of the map structure, more information can be found [here](#322-map)). If however both of the coordinates have changed from the last frame's position we need to check a few more things. 

For the rest of this explanation let's assume that the player on the last frame was on the (a; b) cell, and now he wants to pass into the (a + 1; b + 1) cell. I will use some small graphs to explain the different cases in this function. In these graphs the '@' represents the player on the last frame (or the (a; b) cell), the '#' represents the calculated possible location of the player for this frame (or the (a + 1; b + 1) cell) and the 'x' characters represent cells that block player movement (if the '#' and 'x' characters would overlap they will be replaced by an '0'). The '|' characters are only there to make the graphs prettier and easier to interpret.

```
|@x|
|x#|
```
The next thing we need to check is if the cell the player wants to pass into blocks player movement. If it doesn't we still need to check if the two cells that are next to the player from the last frame in the direction of the desired location block movement (see the figure above), if they do we don't let the player move, because the player would pass through walls, and that is not something we want.

```
|@ |
| 0|
```
If the cell the player wishes to pass into does block movement we need to check if the cells that are next to the player from the last frame in the direction of the desired location block movement (see the figure above), if they don't, we don't let the player move, because he is up against the edge of the deisred location (which blocks movement), and opposed to later cases (see below) the character can't really "slide" on either side of said cell.

```
1. |@ |
   |x0|
   
2. |@x|
   | 0|
```
After the above cases we can be sure, that the desired location blocks movement, and that at least one of the cells that are next to the player from the last frame in the direction of the desired location block movement (see the first two figures from [this very section](#3422-keepinbounds)). We check for these cells one by one, if both of them block movement we don't move the player. If only one is blocking movement we "slide" the player in the logical direction (see the figures above: in the case of the 1st figure we "slide" him to the right, and in the case of the 2nd figure we "slide" him downwards). The logic behind this is the following: the player wants to move to (a + 1; b + 1) but that cell is not avalaible for movement. The inputs consist of the s button (which signals the desire to move downwards) and the d button (which signals the desire to move to the right), so if the player can't move downward AND to the right, he should move to at least in one of the directions he wants to.
#### 3.4.2.3. setDirections
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
mob setDirections(mob playr, bool w, bool s, bool a, bool d)
{
	playr.up = false;
	playr.down = false;
	playr.right = false;
	playr.left = false;
	
	if (w)
	{
		playr.up = true;
	}
	
	if (s)
	{
		playr.down = true;
	}
	
	if (a)
	{
		playr.left = true;
	}
	
	if (d)
	{
		playr.right = true;
	}
	
	return playr;
}
```
**Usage:** This function sets the orientational bools into the correct position (accordint to the input) in the player variable.

**Variables:**
* **playr:** This variable holds the orientation of the player character.
* **w:** This is true when the w key is pressed down. 
* **s:** This is true when the s key is pressed down.
* **a:** This is true when the a key is pressed down.
* **d:** This is true when the d key is pressed down.

**How it's done & notes:** First the function sets all directional bools to false (to learn more about the mob structure click [here](#321-mob)), then it turns the correct bools to ture according to the input. These bools in themselves don't translate into the game, we need [another function to parse them and load the correct FOV assoicated with this direction](#3452-setcurrentfov) (to see all possible FOVs click [here](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/tree/master/FOVs)).
#### 3.4.2.4. camMovement
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
mob camMovement(mob cam, mob playr)
{
	if (playr.right && !playr.up && !playr.down)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 12;
		cam.col = playr.col - 3;
	}
	
	if (playr.right && playr.up)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 16;
		cam.col = playr.col - 9;
	}
	
	if (playr.right && playr.down)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 8;
		cam.col = playr.col - 9;
	}
	
	if (playr.left && !playr.up && !playr.down)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 12;
		cam.col = playr.col - 35;
	}
	
	if (playr.left && playr.up)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 16;
		cam.col = playr.col - 29;
	}
	
	if (playr.left && playr.down)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 8;
		cam.col = playr.col - 29;
	}
	
	if (playr.up && !playr.right && !playr.left)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 22;
		cam.col = playr.col - 19;
	}
	
	if (playr.down && !playr.right && !playr.left)
	{
		cam.row = playr.row - 2;
		cam.col = playr.col - 19;
	}

	return cam;
}
```
**Usage:** Reurns the position of where the camera SHOULD be, according to the orientation of the player.

**Variables:**
* **cam:** Holds the position of where the camera SHOULD be.
* **playr:** Holds the position of the player.

**How it's done & notes:** The different camera positions associated with every orientation are hardcoded into this function. For further information about how this should work and plans for future updates click [here](#2211-how-to-use-the-fov-editors). To learn more about the variable that holds where the camera SHOULD be click [here](#337-wheretocamera).
#### 3.4.2.5. cameraPan
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
mob cameraPan(mob cam, mob camDest)
{
	if (cam.row < camDest.row)
	{
		cam.row++;
	}
	
	if (cam.row > camDest.row)
	{
		cam.row--;
	}
	
	if (cam.col < camDest.col)
	{
		cam.col++;
	}
	
	if (cam.col > camDest.col)
	{
		cam.col--;
	}

	return cam;
}
```
**Usage:** This function brings the camera closer on every frame to the position it should be.

**Variables:**
* **cam:** This variable holds information about the position of the camera.
* **camDest:** This variable holds information about where the camera SHOULD be.

**How it's done & notes:** This function increments or decrements (or does nothing with) the camera's correct coordinate. Since this gets called every frame the camera gets closer to it's destination on every frame, or if the camera is on the destination it should be the camera doesn't get moved. Since the movement speed of the camera, and the player character is the same, when the player turns quickly around and keeps moving in that direction the camera can't catch up with its destination and thus the camera doesn't show the majority of the player's FOV. A fix for this issue is planned for a future update of the engine. For information about the camera click [here](#336-camera), and for information about the camera's destination click [here](#337-wheretocamera).
#### 3.4.2.6. keepCamInBounds
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
mob keepCamInBounds(mob cam)
{
	if (cam.row < 0)
	{
		cam.row = 0;
	}
	
	if (cam.col < 0)
	{
		cam.col = 0;
	}
	
	if (cam.row > WORLDROWS - SCREENROWS)
	{
		cam.row = WORLDROWS - SCREENROWS;
	}
	
	if (cam.col > WORLDCOLS - SCREENCOLS)
	{
		cam.col = WORLDCOLS - SCREENCOLS;
	}
	
	return cam;
}
```
**Usage:** This function makes sure the camera dosen't show anything that would be out of bounds of the map.

**Variables:**
* **cam:** Holds information about the position of the camera.

**How it's done & notes:** First the function checks if any of the camera's coordinates are lower than 0, if they are they get set back to 0. Since what the camera shows is displayed in [the newScreen array](#3314-newscreen), the next thing the function checks is if any of the camera's coordinates are bigger than the world's correct dimension minus the screen's correct dimension, if they are they get set back to the difference of those dimensions. For information about the camera click [here](#336-camera).
