## 3.4. Functions
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
This section of [the third chapter of the documentation](#3-detailed-description-of-everything) will not go over the functions in order of apperance (as opposed to the previous sections) but in the order that they are in their header files. Thus this section will have the following parts:
* [input.h](#341-inputh)
* [movement.h](#342-movementh)
* [output.h](#343-outputh)
* [render.h](#344-renderh)
* [shadowFunctions.h](#345-shadowfunctionsh)
### 3.4.1. [input.h](https://github.com/mmmuscus/Shadow-Functions-Engine/blob/master/headers/input/input.h)
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
This header file contains functions that deal with the input coming form the keboard.
#### 3.4.1.1. ___Pressed
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
bool wPressed()
{
	if (GetKeyState('W') & 0x8000)
	{
		return true;
	}
}

bool aPressed()
{
	if (GetKeyState('A') & 0x8000)
	{
		return true;
	}
}

bool sPressed()
{
	if (GetKeyState('S') & 0x8000)
	{
		return true;
	}
}

bool dPressed()
{
	if (GetKeyState('D') & 0x8000)
	{
		return true;
	}
}

bool escPressed()
{
	if (GetKeyState(VK_ESCAPE) & 0x8000) 
	{
		return true;
	}
}
```

**Usage:** These functions return true when the correct key is pressed down.

**Variables:** -

**How it's done & notes:** The functions use another function called [GetKeyState](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/desktop/api/winuser/nf-winuser-getkeystate). This function can be found in [the windiws.h header](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows.h) which countains lots of useful functions from the windows API. The ___Pressed functions are one of the three places where I used external resources to solve my problem. The other link I used to write these can be found [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6331868/using-getkeystate).
#### 3.4.1.2. cancelOut
###### This section was last checked in the 1.0.0. version of the engine
```cpp
void cancelOut (bool plus, bool minus)
{
	if (plus && minus)
	{
		plus = false;
		minus = false;
	}
}
```
**Usage:** This function cancels out two bools if they are both true.

**Variables:**
* **plus:** Holds the first bool we want to check.
* **minus:** Holds the second bool we want to check.

**How it's done & notes:** We check if both of the variables are ture. If they are we set them both to false. This is used to cancel out contradictory input (for example when both the a and d keys are pressed), but it could be used for any form of cancellation of contradictory bools.
